JUDY WOODRUFF: For more than
35 years, the so-called Gulf
Cooperation Council, or GCC,
has united the nations of
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Bahrain,
Qatar, the United Arab Emirates,
and Oman, the goal, to put the
wealthy, predominantly-Sunni
nations of the Persian
Gulf behind common
cultural, political and
military objectives.
But, overnight,
long-simmering tensions
between Qatar and several
of its fellow members, and
other regional states,
burst into full-fledged
diplomatic crisis.
Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, the
UAE and Egypt, among others,
broke off diplomatic contact
and suspended commercial ties
with the Qatari government.
For more on these
dramatic developments,
I'm joined by Joyce Karam,
the Washington bureau
chief of Al-Hayat.
It's an international
Arabic daily newspaper.
Joyce, thank you very
much for being with us.
Why did this happen?
JOYCE KARAM, Al-Hayat: Well,
as you said, Judy, this is
a very dramatic escalation.
We have been covering
tense relations between
Qatar and Saudi Arabia
and the UAE for a while,
but it hasn't ever gotten
to the point where they're
not only closing embassies.
They're sealing off the border.
They're blocking airspace
and maritime access to Qatar.
Qatar, as you know, is
a country smaller than
the state of Connecticut.
It's completely dependent
for its food supplies,
for -- 40 percent of
its food supplies come
from Saudi Arabia.
So, this is dramatic,
unprecedented escalation.
It comes at a time where we
are told that both the Saudis
and the Emiratis have had
enough.
There is -- almost every
alignment in the region, there's
two camps today, if you want
to say.
There's the pro-Islamist
movement camps, where
Qatar is now boxed in,
and the more closer
to this administration, the
Saudi and the Emirati and the
Egyptian camp, and this is
where things are
going from here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, among other
things, we're hearing that
these five countries are saying
Qatar is too extremist, that
it's been sponsoring terrorism.
The Qataris are saying
-- say that's not true.
What's really going on?
JOYCE KARAM: Well, it's, again,
this different alignment in
the region post-Arab Spring of
2011.
Qatar is seen today
as a host leaders from
Hamas, from Taliban.
Actually, just tonight,
the Qatari emir will be
hosting Sheik Kardari
(ph), who is well-known
extremist in the
region, for an iftar.
So...
JUDY WOODRUFF:
That's an Islamic...
JOYCE KARAM: Islamic cleric.
So, in that sense, Qatar
is seen as very closed,
has boxed itself in with
these Islamist movements.
And this has been a problem
with its relations with Egypt,
with Saudi Arabia and with the
Emiratis.
And what we're seeing unfold is
a clash, is a rift within the
GCC on the direction forward,
whether it's in
counterterrorism or other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we know that
some of these countries that are
accusing Qatar have themselves
at times supported some of
the extremist opposition
forces in Syria, for example.
So is it so clear that Qatar
is doing something different
from what these other countries
have been doing?
JOYCE KARAM: It's -- I think
Syria is a very complicated
battleground, but, if you look
at Syria itself, the main
group that is affiliated
with al-Qaida, formerly
known as Jabhat al-Nusra,
is -- it's supported by Qatar.
It's -- the head of a
group, Julani, gives
interviews on Al-Jazeera.
There was a Financial Times
story today that Qatar might
have indirectly paid a ransom
of $1 billion that
went to extremists on
both sides in Syria.
So, this has become
problematic within the GCC.
And I think they do feel
bolstered after the Trump
visit to do more on that front.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
countries that have --
because it's true that this
has happened just a week
or two after President Trump
was there in Saudi Arabia.
But -- so, let's quickly talk
about -- Joyce, about how this
affects the region and relations
with the U.S. going forward.
JOYCE KARAM: I mean, this is a
very tense time in the region.
This is an almost Arab cold
war happening within the
Gulf Cooperation Council.
I think the U.S. tried to
distance itself today a bit.
The Pentagon reiterated its
defense relations with Qatar.
Al Udeid Air Base continues to
be active, that the counter-ISIS
effort will not be impacted
by this.
As we speak also, Judy, I think
the Kuwaitis are trying to
mediate, to find a common ground
in the coming hours.
The emir of Kuwait
will be heading to
Saudi Arabia tomorrow.
If they can achieve a
breakthrough, you know,
given the list of demands
that Saudi and the
UAE have put together, that
means maybe the citizens of
Qatar will not be expelled from
these countries.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Unfair to ask
you this question and ask for a
quick answer, but is there fear
this could lead to all-out war?
JOYCE KARAM: I don't think any
side at this point is interested
in a military confrontation.
And I think Qatar, given that
it's a small country, and most
of Qatar's strategic depth
is within the Gulf
region, I don't think
Qatar has an alternative
but to fix this with its
neighbors.
A Saudi official tells me that
the only way this is -- there
would be an exit is if Qatar
went away and, you know,
forgot its old habits.
So, we're looking -- they're
looking at a change of behavior
from Qatar, not just demands,
as it happened in 2014.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Joyce
Karam, tough subject.
Thank you very
much, with Al-Hayat.
JOYCE KARAM: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We appreciate it
JOYCE KARAM: Thank you so much.